generally speaking all we need to do to
create a procedural texture is combining the cordon maps
with the different tools and mathematical operations that the
different notes providers with in just the right way
the most universal skill to help with that is being
able to control values exactly how you want them.
That will automatically involve some level of mathematics
but that can be broken down to simple chunks.
The nice thing about having a direct visual representation of what we are
working on is that you can easily work in modular steps and check
what the output is at any point because it can be extremely hard
to read precise values and gradients just from the shade on your screen.
I made a little tool for the visualization of values on a surface.
I will be using this tool a couple of times throughout this course
but I want to encourage you to play around with it yourself as well.
Let me quickly explain how the tool works
in the shader of this plane.
You can see that there is a note group that takes object coordinates
and returns values which are then displayed with the view. Note.
When you tab into the note group
you can define the texture that has returned and displayed.
And the great thing about this setup now is that the
value map is also used to inform this red and blue graph
that you can see in the view port here.
His height information.
The different views that there are set up by default show the plane in top view
the graph and thrown view
and the perspective view where you can look around.
Positive values are displayed as blue and negative values
is read that gives you very good knowledge over
the value map you are generating and is a
great way to debug textures and preview height maps.
This tool bypasses the difficulties are listed in
the chapter about the display of values.
I recommend you use it to familiarize yourself with
the different operations for controlling values in general but
you can also use it to help out when you're working on a shader to do that.
You can simply replace the notes within this note group.
Right now it is just displaying the X.
Component of the object coordinates that are fed into the note group.
As you would expect
the graph shows a linear curve from negative 12 positive one
along the X axis.
You can change the scale of the whole graph by moving this empty here
which represents the scale of one unit along the Z axis.
The most basic but also most versatile way to control values in the shader editor
is using the math note
when I add one in here and click on the operation type.
You can see that there are a lot of
mathematical operations that can be done with this note.
Again I won't show every single one in here.
I will show a couple that are useful in a lot of situations
and then I will show more throughout the course when they are needed
but feel free to check them out individually
Before I start different operations here. A quick tip.
When working with value maps,
it is helpful to think about what an operation does to the values zero and 1
to have some idea of how it influences the different values.
Using the add operation as you can see
shifts the resulting gradient texture to the left.
That works only because the input is the X coordinate
and it is not locked in a range between zero and one.
What actually happens is that the values are shifted
up but because it is just a linear curve,
it could just as well be shifting from side to side as you can see here.
This gets clear when I apply the ad operation until the Musgrave texture that
have been shown before negative values of
course shift into the opposite direction.
The subtract operation that's basically the same thing just with negative values.
But by instead of plugging the texture into the first socket,
subtracting it from one
can easily invert the value map. So black becomes white and white becomes black.
The operations multiply and divide scale the values around zero by a factor.
And just as for adding and subtracting
the scaling is actually happening on the Z axis.
But because the operation is applied to linear coordinate values,
the results also in scaling the gradient along the X axis
by chaining an offset operation and a scaling operation together
you can have complete control over Remapping the values linearly.
That means you can shift stretch,
squish and invert the resulting gradient texture
however you want to so the position
of black and white changes but the
interpolation between them will still remain linear
as long as you are using constant value inputs.
A simple method to introduce some curvature into
the gradient is to use the power operation.
You can see that the positions of zero and one
stay the same but the curve between them changes.
If you have some mathematical expertise,
you can use the combination of these math operations to
create all sorts of polynomial exponential functions and what not.
But for most training use cases you can get
along great with the visual interpretation of shifting and squishing
a more intuitive way to remember gradient is using a color ramp.
It's visual intuitiveness makes it often the first choice for people starting out
with shader notes when they are trying to control gradients like this,
the color um note definitely has its place when it comes to mapping
actual colors to a gradient or when you need multiple stops like this
and want to change the interpolation type
but if you only want to remap values like this.
I want to take the opportunity to advocate for using the map range.
Note instead it is much more powerful as it can deal with negative values
and values greater than one
and it also provides sockets for the different inputs.
So you can actually drive them with a texture or expose them in a note group
and once you get used to the ideas of these inputs,
it can become also quite intuitive,
just like what we did with just the math nodes.
It re maps the values linearly to a new range,
but the parameters here are just what incoming range is mapped to,
what outgoing range,
which works much more like the color ramp than the math notes. If you think about it,
you can also change the interpolation type to get a smooth curve or steps
a more loose and flexible way to control values. Is using an RgB curves node.
It is meant to be used for colours as the name suggests and that makes it less optimal.
But it is a great way to quickly control
a gradient intuitively and with a lot of flexibility.
I will show a very useful application of this method in the following chapter.
One more thing at this point.
The efficiency of your no tree is something you should always have in mind,
especially when you're working on more complex setups.
So if possible,
try using the simplest method needed for what we are trying to achieve.
For example,
instead of using the map range note when you're only changing the maximum input,
just use a multiply node
that makes you know, trees easier to read and also faster